Anybody here have any New Year's goals, resolutions, dreams, desires, a few people?
Okay.
So how many of you want to work out this year and get in better shape?
How many of you want to eat better?
How many of you want to get out of debt, save more money or graduate from college or have a child or have your kids move out?
I mean, any of one of those things.
Listen, what is it in the human soul that sets resolutions and goals
and desires and dreams and what is it about a new year that caused us to do that?
Well, when we look back and we see all the things that we wanted to do that we didn't do, the people, the person we wanted to become that we haven't yet become and our desire is to grow.
We don't want to be stuck.
We don't want to be stagnant.
We don't want to be the same.
And the challenge with that is we have to overcome some habits that have sort of become part of who we are and to overcome those habits and break them.
We have to create new habits and that's painful.
That's difficult.
That's why in about 10 days, most people who make resolutions stop, they quit.
It's too hard.
I was working out and I'm so sore, I can't drink my coffee in the morning.
And I want ice cream so bad, the ice cream speaks to me from the fridge.
I just can't anymore.
You see, training is a slow process.
It's a slow process that,
makes progress slower than you thought and you're sore and you're tired and you just want to go back to that old habit because it's so much easier like that old comfortable shoe.
And yet the Bible compels us not just to think about goals for our body, but how do we train our soul?
Listen to what the apostle Paul says to Timothy, his young apprentice.
Train yourself to be godly.
Train yourself.
That sounds like a lot of effort.
It sounds like a workout.
Then he says this, for physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come.
Christian, train yourself to be godly.
Paul compares training your soul to training your body.
physical, it's hard.
And training your body and eating well and sleeping well, it does so many good things for your life, for creativity, for satisfaction, for healthy relationship.
But Paul says, training your body has benefit, but training your soul has benefit, not just for now, 2026, but for your entire life into eternity.
Training yourself to be the person that,
God wants you to be, that you want to be, has benefit all the way into eternity.
Now, this sounds like a lot of hard work.
Doesn't the Bible say that we're saved by grace?
And it's the gift of God?
Yes.
We are saved by grace, but training requires effort.
Grace driven effort.
You see, some people that are Christians, they embrace this idea of grace, like God saved me, and I didn't do anything to earn it and deserve it, and that's correct.
They take that and they say, but, and so I'm just gonna ask God to just change me.
Just change me.
In 2026, just change me.
And that doesn't just happen because you put out your hands and say, God, change me.
God's not gonna do for you something that you can do.
He does His part and now He asks you to do His part.
See, grace is not opposed to effort.
It's opposed to earning.
And so what does it mean for us to train our souls and take this encouragement?
And what would 2026 be like if we
if we prioritize the gathering together.
If every weekend you say, I'm just gonna watch online at home, I'm gonna come and gather with God's people in worship, taking communion together, praying at the altar together, getting to know people.
What if I prioritize reading God's word?
What if every day of 2026 I open God's word, even if I just read a sentence?
What would happen if I prioritize prayer?
And that's the first four weeks of our series together.
What would happen if,
If in moments of stress, you learned how to train your soul to pray and call it to God, and then anxiety would fade away in the light of who God is.
What if in moments of temptation, you would pause and pray and you would experience a breakthrough, a power you've never experienced before?
What would happen if you went through the awkward stage of learning to pray out loud with your family, with your friends?
And in those moments where you need unity, where there was division, and those moments where you need clarity, where there was cloudiness, it would come because
God has invited you to pray, to be in this life-giving relationship that we call prayer.
And so as Christians, as followers of Jesus, well, we want to see what did Jesus do and how can he teach us?
Because there was a moment in the disciples' life, the first 12 disciples, where they noticed this pattern in Jesus' life.
He would always be wandering off to pray.
And one day, in Luke chapter 11, a disciple asked him,
This question.
One day Jesus was praying in a certain place and when he finished, one of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray.
Jesus, we wonder, how do you talk to God?
How do you develop this conversation?
You sneak away and sometimes when you pray, you pray in different ways than other people and we don't know how to pray that way.
We really wanna have this relationship with God that you do.
So teach us how to pray.
Because prayer is a relationship between God the Father and His people.
And Jesus demonstrates this, that prayer is this dialogue.
And Jesus would always sneak away at the wrong moments to pray.
There was a moment in Mark chapter one where revival was taking place.
Jesus heals and casts out demons and preaches and crowds are gathering.
And the next morning the crowds are already gathering.
Disciples are looking for Jesus to find out, hey, we're going big.
The kingdom of God is common.
And this is where the ministry is gonna grow.
And Jesus is nowhere.
to be found.
And the disciples are desperate because everyone is waiting to talk to Jesus in Mark chapter one, verse 35.
Here's where Jesus went.
Very early in the morning while it was still dark, Jesus got up, left the house and went off to a solitary place where he prayed.
And the disciples are like, what are you doing?
This is the kingdom of God.
This is the crowd.
This is the moment and Jesus says to them,
Hey, we're gonna go to the next town.
Slavel's just got to know, this is no way to launch a ministry, to leave the crowd.
No, I need to go to the next town because this is why I came, my mission, my clarity.
See, Jesus knew that getting away to spend time in prayer gave him clarity for his mission.
In fact, if you think of all these major moments in Jesus' life, like getting ready to go into ministry, 40 days in the desert, pray.
picking his disciples, praying all night on the side of a mountain before he picks his 12 disciples.
Even in moments where he does miracles, he would pause and pray.
These miraculous things would happen.
Jesus had this pattern of prayer and the disciples wanted to know how to pray.
Jesus teach us how to pray.
This was Jesus' practice.
Now I'm gonna give you this word practice and I want you to think about it.
Practice can be either a verb or a noun.
The verb form of practice means something you do over and over and over again.
I'm practicing, I'm practicing, I'm practicing.
They have this phrase that practice makes perfect.
But once you've practiced it over and over and over again, it becomes a noun.
It becomes your practice.
And if you've ever seen someone who's practiced and practiced and practiced something really well, that when they practice it, it seems effortless.
I mean, I don't know if you're here for
Christmas Eve, but I was watching the people play the violin and the cello.
And it was just like, it was like effortless.
Like they weren't even thinking.
And you're thinking about that must be just amazing gift, but you don't see the hundreds of hours of practice that allow that practice to happen.
Anybody a golfer?
You ever see a perfect golf swing?
The worst thing you can do when you swing a golf club is to think about it.
But when you practice so long, you can do it without even thinking.
And this is our desire.
We wanna practice prayer because we know we need to grow in prayer until it becomes our practice.
So just a quick survey.
How many of you wish that you prayed more deeply and more consistently in your relationship with God?
Raise your hand.
All right, everyone look around.
Almost every hand went up.
Hands of people who just started following Jesus, maybe the last year.
And people who've been following Jesus for 30, 40, 50 years.
What is that?
That is our deep desire.
It's what the world needs.
It's what we need.
We wanna be shaped by the God who made us, who made us for relationship.
And so that's gonna require some practice to like any human relationship.
And so for the next four weeks, we're gonna practice
And we're going to give you sort of a scaffolding, an acronym that's going to help shape the way that we practice prayer.
It's the word, pray.
And it's an acronym.
The P stands for pause.
Before we begin to talk, we need to stop and listen.
That's going to be what we talk about today.
Next week, it's how do we reflect and rejoice.
And then the A, ask, which most people think that's what prayer is all about, just a part of prayer.
And then why for yield?
Again, this is like a scaffolding.
It's like a structure to help our prayer life grow.
If we just say pray more, pray harder, like the Tom Brady motivation, do better.
Most of us, it's gonna fade.
If I say get in shape or eat better or get out of debt, well, it's not gonna help.
But if you have this app that tells you what to eat and when to eat it.
If you have this app that tells you how to save and what to do with the money that you have, its structure helps to train your mind and your soul to do something that's gonna have a benefit for the rest of your life.
So everyone say train.
Everyone say practice.
We're gonna train and practice so that we can be Godly and we can learn from Jesus.
So today, the practice of pausing.
before we go into the Lord's prayer and the things that Jesus taught his disciples.
We notice that so many times Jesus would stop, would get away.
And we're gonna look at some of those simple practices, things we can practice in our life.
And so, here's the first one.
Find your place.
You see, if I ask you where do you pray or when do you pray?
You say, I pray all the time.
That probably means there's not that connection.
that place where you can meet God every day.
Jesus found early in the morning he would go to a quiet, remote place.
Jesus had a favorite spot called the Garden of Gethsemane where he would go and retreat and pray.
He often retreated to a mountainside where he could pause and get away from the crowd and away from the noise to pray.
And we see this pattern all through the Bible.
Adam would walk with God in the cool of the day.
Abraham would walk
under the stars and look up.
Samuel would pray in a temple.
David would pray in a cave.
Esther and Nehemi would pray in a palace.
There were places of prayer as people found their way to connect with God.
And well, there was a place that Moses would meet with God.
It's Exodus chapter 33 verse seven.
Look at this description.
Now Moses used to take a tent and pitch it outside the camp.
some distance away, calling it the tent of the meeting.
He took a tent, got it away from the millions of people over to the side, and he would walk into this tent and he would meet with God.
And what happened when he walked into that tent and met with God while the cloud would descend?
And here's what would happen in that tent.
And the Lord would speak to Moses face to face as one speaks to a friend.
There is that place.
where Moses could get away, walk into the tent and have a conversation with the God of the universe.
Like a friend talks to a friend.
It was a holy pause.
And so here's my question for you.
Here's a question for all of us.
Where is your place?
It's an important question.
I'm gonna ask it again, where's that place where you meet with God every day?
For some people here, I know it's a chair.
You have this chair, you wake up and you sit in this chair and you grab your coffee and you open the Bible and you pause before your day starts.
My wife, she has this prayer shawl, she kind of puts it over her and she either sits in the corner or gets down on the face and just spends some time in the morning in the presence of God.
Eyes closed.
Me?
I walk where I sit outside.
I almost often pray with my eyes open in my backyard, around my block, where I sit at my desk in the morning before everyone gets to work and I'm there and I just pause.
I look at my calendar.
I look at my day and I just pause, Lord.
What do you want me to do today?
I said, look at each of these appointments.
What do you want me to say to each of these people?
How can I just take a moment and listen to what you say before I just jump?
into doing all these things.
And sometimes when I retreat, that place I most deeply connect with God is on a paddle board in the middle of the water, watching the sun set or rise and feeling like I'm this tiny little person in all of God's creation.
And I feel so small, but so deeply loved.
And there's something about just pausing before we do all these things for God.
God, you love me.
Your eye is on me.
I don't know what to do today.
I don't know how to solve all the problems that are here, but I know that you're with me and your eyes on me.
So fill me, help me.
Just a quiet place to connect with God, the Father.
So how do we find our place?
If you don't have a place, then practice.
What's the most likely place where you could pray and connect with God, where you can stay attentive?
Eyes closed, eyes open, inside, outside, in a chair, in the backyard.
That's something I want you to practice.
Number two, Jesus teaches us that there's a need to disconnect from the noise.
Jesus didn't just walk away during that opening chapter of Mark,
Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.
Luke made this observation.
This was a pattern in Jesus' life.
He was often withdrawing from the crowds, from the action, from the noise, from all the opinions and thoughts of all the people.
Hey Jesus, you should do that or you should do this.
Hey Jesus, the crowd's over here, go here.
Hey, here's what Rome says.
Here's what the high priests say.
And Jesus learned to disconnect from all of the noise.
How do you disconnect from the noise so that those moments of prayer and quiet aren't always interrupted with all of the voices in your life?
You see, there's a way sometimes where we can get in our own head and we can get in all the noise.
Have you ever gotten into your own head?
Ever got to a place where your mind just ruminates over and over and over again and you're just in your own head and you're saying stuff and you just, your mind's like a dangerous neighborhood.
You should never go in it by yourself, but you're there.
Listen, if that's you, you're in good company.
The Bible is full of people who got in their own head.
And I want to share with you an example of how withdrawing from the noise, well, it saved a prophet named Elijah.
You see, in 1 Kings chapter 19, Elijah is, at the beginning of 1 Kings 19, he's on the highest high he's ever had his entire life.
Because of his prayer, there was
a drought and for three years no water came to Israel and the king and everyone was mad at Elijah.
And so he offers this context in 1 Kings 18 and brings all the prophets of Baal and Asherah and he calls down fire from heaven and the fire from heaven falls and everyone realizes that he is the prophet and God Yahweh is the God they should worship.
And then it starts to rain and Elijah experiences this incredible victory, kills all the prophets of Baal and Asherah.
I mean, it's a time where rightness and goodness win and evil is vanquished.
It's what we all long for.
But the next day, Jezebel puts out a death warrant, a bounty on Elijah's head.
And Elijah gets in his head.
The noise, well, he gets to the point where he's like, you know what, none of this was worth it and God just kill me now.
And what's the point?
What's the point of it all?
And sometimes in life, you can get to that place where you try to do good and you experience victory.
And then all of a sudden you take three steps backwards and you're like,
What's the point of following God?
What's the point of serving God?
What's the point of doing what's right?
Look at those people doing what's wrong.
And they seem to be happier than me and Elijah's in his own head.
And so for 40 days, he goes on a journey just running, running with these questions, with this disappointment, with the disillusionment in his mind.
And he gets to this place, this cave.
And now he's away from all the noise and it's completely quiet.
And this is where God is going to invite Elijah to have a conversation.
1 Kings 19 verse 11.
The Lord said to Elijah, go out and stand on the mountain in the presence of the Lord, for the Lord is about to pass by.
Then a great and powerful wind tore the mountain apart and shattered the rocks before the Lord.
But the Lord was not in the wind.
After the wind, there was an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake.
After the earthquake came a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire.
And after the fire came a gentle whisper.
And when Elijah heard it, he pulled his cloak over his face and went out and stood at the mouth of the cave.
And then the boy said to him, what are you doing here, Elijah?
What's happening here?
Elijah is in his own head.
He's disappointed, disillusioned, depressed.
He runs away, trying to just get away, get away from it all, all the noise.
And then finally in a quiet place, God says, Elijah, I'm gonna talk to you.
I'm gonna pass by.
And so Elijah is in this cave.
It's kind of a picture of where he's at in life.
And he comes out to the entrance of the cave and there's this massive windstorm.
God's not speaking in the windstorm.
an earthquake and then a fire.
And God's not any of those things.
And this tells us something very important about prayer.
If we pray and say, God, show up like this, show up like that, do it like this, do it like I want it.
Most often God does not answer prayer that way.
But God shows up in a way that Elijah does not expect in a gentle whisper.
The only way you hear a gentle whisper is if you're quiet.
if you're away from the noise.
And God asked Elijah a question, what are you doing here?
Now when God asked the question, it's not because he doesn't know the answer.
He's drawing Elijah out of his self pity, out of his depression.
And he gives Elijah in this quiet whisper, a new purpose, a greater purpose than Elijah's ever had in his life.
And Elijah leaves that cave, a changed person.
You see, in life, the truth is quiet.
The lies are loud.
And if we never withdraw and get quiet, we'll only hear the lies.
We'll only hear what we think God should do in the world.
And one of the greatest dangers, one of the greatest enemies of quiet is this thing we carry around with us all the time that demands our attention.
And I wanna share with you just a little bit behind how smartphones work.
Because we live in what we call an attention economy.
When sociologists and programmers were developing this thing, their goal was to get you to stay attuned to it as long as possible.
That you weren't shopping for commodities or looking for commodities, you were the commodity.
This was made with you in mind.
How much of your attention can we
capture, how long can we keep it?
I don't care how you vote or what you buy, as long as you stay attuned, you become the commodity.
That's why when you're home over Christmas break, talking about, oh, we should go to New York, all of a sudden these flights to New York and hotels to New York and things to New York appear on your phone, you're like, is my phone listening to me?
The answer is yes it is.
Or
if you're playing that video game and you're so into it.
You know, the programmers know how the human tendency is to go to a certain level and if you don't get past a certain level, you're gonna quit.
And right when you're about to quit, they let you in.
That's not because you're good at the game.
It's because they know your human tendency.
They can get you to work so hard and then get to the next level.
You'll stay in that game for the next 50 hours of your life.
And if we're gonna be people who pray, we need to know that our souls are being formed and shaped by this.
We're being discipled by this, whatever the content is discipling us to not even know how to pause.
And one of the most powerful spiritual things you can do to train yourself to be godly is to do this.
Right?
Now I'm not saying this is easy.
I find myself over the break just like, I'm just scrolling, scrolling, scrolling.
I mean, I've been on this thing for like 45 minutes.
Like, what did I, what did I just do?
I just wasted all this time.
The gravitational pull toward the noise, toward the not being quiet.
Well, it is relentless.
In fact, you know, one of those places for me is just like pulling up to a traffic light and you stop and you're in your car and you're like, oh, this lights about three minutes.
I mean, there's got to be something that happened in the last three minutes that, you know, I need to know about.
And then you find yourself here and then you ever have that annoying person that's on their phone when the lights go in and you miss the light?
Yeah.
Have you ever been that annoying person?
Hey, you have too.
You know, you know you did.
Listen, even like three minutes in the car, we can't stop and disconnect ourselves.
What if, what if we just took this three minutes and just pray?
So last night I said this out loud, so now I gotta hold myself accountable, you gotta hold me accountable.
Just ask me, how are you doing at traffic lights?
What if the three minutes at the traffic light was a chance to say, God, the conversation I just left, I'm gonna pray for that person.
The conversation I'm going to, I'm gonna pray for wisdom in that situation.
God, I'm gonna thank you for a life and breath and a car that works and traffic lights that work and all of a sudden those three minutes become a place of,
So ask me, hold me accountable.
How do we disconnect from the noise?
So three, how do we create space to listen?
God is always speaking all the time.
The Son, Jesus, He's always speaking.
The Holy Spirit, He's always speaking all through the Bible.
People become aware, oh, God was speaking.
And I did not know it.
And one of the most frequent questions that I get as a pastor is, Doug, how do I learn to hear the voice of God?
And this is such an important question.
And it's a question that we grapple with our entire Christian life.
How do I learn to hear the voice of God?
And there's so many examples in the Bible of people who had to learn this.
It wasn't like all the people in the Bible just heard God speak and said, yes, it did all the things.
Listen, when you hear in Abraham's life the times that God spoke to him, this is over, over a hundred years of his life.
And it seems like in every chapter God's speaking,
But when you do, the math is only every 20, 30, 40 years.
He has these clear interactions with God.
So what if God spoke to you clearly every 20 or 30 years?
Would you be okay with that?
Samuel's a little boy.
We went through first Samuel last year.
He's a little boy.
He's never heard in God's voice.
And so he's sleeping in the tabernacle and he hears this voice.
Samuel, Samuel.
So he gets up and he runs to Eli.
Eli, did you call me?
Eli said, no, go back to bed.
Here's it again.
Runs to Eli.
Eli, did you call me?
No, no, third time.
Samuel, Samuel.
He runs to Eli.
Eli says, okay, I want you to go back.
And when you go back, when you hear that voice, Samuel, Samuel, here's what I want you to say.
And so Samuel goes back and hears the voice and he says, speak for your servant is listening.
What happened in that interaction?
You have a young boy who doesn't recognize the voice of God.
You have an old man who's familiar with the voice of God and has developed a language to pray and listen.
And even though at this point he's sort of disconnected from God, he has that muscle memory.
He knows what God's voice sounds like.
He trains this young boy to hear God's voice in a time where God's voice was rare.
And Sam becomes again, one of the greatest prophets that Israel has ever known.
We all have to learn how to listen, how to pause, how to hear God's voice.
And the reality is,
Before we learn to speak, we have to listen.
Think about children.
How did kids learn to talk?
They learned to talk by listening to their parents and imitating their parents, and then they start to babble, dada, mama.
And no one thinks a baby is stupid because they can't talk, right?
Everyone's like, oh, our grandson, our grandson.
They're developing a language.
beautiful because one day they're gonna be able to talk.
But there's something so precious about those first few words of babbling because you've been listening and imitating.
If you don't know how to listen to God's voice, then hang out with other Christians who have learned to speak the language of prayer and listen to God and learn from them.
But if we're always in a hurry, if our mind is always preoccupied, this will never occur to us.
Dallas Willard would say this, the greatest enemy of your spiritual
growth is hurry.
The greatest enemy of your spiritual growth is hurry.
And so he gives this simple idea, you must ruthlessly eliminate hurry from your life.
And as we look through the pages of scripture, we see men and women learning to pause.
and get away from the noise and the hurry and the activity so they can attend to the voice and the presence of God.
Here's what the Psalmist writes, Psalm 119.
You're my place of quiet retreat.
I wait for your word to renew me.
The quieter the mind, the better the connection in prayer.
The quieter the mind, the greater the connection.
in prayer, which means there are certain moments.
We have to push this aside.
We have to get out from the noise and we need to listen.
Lord, I'm your servant.
Speak, I'm listening.
Now, again, if our mind is so full, Psalm 10 verse four describes a man whose mind is so full, there is no room in his life for God.
Imagine that.
No room in his thoughts for God, because his mind is so filled with all the things that there's no room left for God.
And that man is disconnected from God.
And often those people who are busiest feel the most angst that they're not accomplishing the things they really want to.
And it could be because they're doing so much activity that God doesn't want them to do.
They're working so hard, but they're not feeling that sense of purpose and peace about what they're doing.
And that's why pausing is so important.
Cause you know, you can work really hard doing the wrong thing.
You can do a lot of good things and miss the most important things.
And there's a key moment in the life of the church when the church pauses.
You see, after the Great Commission where Jesus said, go into all the world and preach the gospel and baptize the name of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit and teach people to bathe.
Everything I've commanded.
And the disciples are ready to go.
And Jesus says, what?
Before you go, pause.
And then Jesus says this.
On one occasion, while he's eating with them, he gave them this command, do not
Leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised, which you have heard me speak about.
Because in a few days, I'm gonna baptize you with the Holy Spirit.
Before you go on this great commission, the most important mission that's ever been given to people.
Before you do this, pause, wait, pray.
And I'm gonna show up and my Holy Spirit's gonna baptize you.
and you're going to be filled with power and the presence of God in a way that you've never experienced before.
And now you'll be able to go and change the world.
What would happen if before you did that big thing at work, you did that important thing at home, you did that thing you've been praying and waiting for for so long, what if you just pause and said, Lord, before I walk in that room, before I step into that meeting, before I have this conversation,
Fill me with your spirit.
If there's anything else you want me to say, speak it to me now.
And just wait it.
30 seconds.
How much different would those conversations go?
Would those moments be if we created that space to pause?
And so this is going to require practice.
There's a famous monk.
His name is Brother Lawrence.
This was his desire.
He's in a monastery and he's like, I want to learn how to practice the presence of God in common things.
When I wash dishes, when I pull weeds, when I clean up messes, I want to be able to be present with God.
And that means I want to practice the presence of God.
And he wrote a book that hundreds of years later still helping Christians understand how in very simple, basic moments they can listen and experience this presence with God.
And so we're going to practice.
I'm gonna give you one minute to sit in complete quiet in the presence of God.
And maybe you can just say something like, Father, speak to me.
I'm listening.
Maybe you say, God, you have a word for me today.
I want to hear what it is.
So let's just take a moment, one minute in complete quiet and let's practice the presence of God.
Now if a word came to mind or a person came to mind, scripture came in mind, a problem came in mind, just write it down.
And then be curious about that.
Maybe God gave you a word that is going to be a word for a year.
Maybe God gave you, I'm going to say, maybe God gave you nothing at all.
Maybe you're like, I must be the only person here who heard nothing.
I promise you, you're not the only person who heard nothing.
Sometimes when I sit in the presence of God and quiet, it's like there's monkeys on tree just jumping down and everything distracts me all over the place.
And I end up going, I spent five minutes in my mind was everywhere and I'm practicing.
The president got learned to quiet my mind and learning to ask God speak to me.
I'm listening.
Before I give God my list of all my requests, I want you to sit and listen now.
or some people just sitting in quiet is a beautiful way they connect with God.
But it's not the only way to connect with God.
The Bible also says that God speaks to us, his people through his word.
This is not just a book of history or theology or wisdom or poetry.
This is a living and active word of God, where God will pull a verse that you've read a hundred times in your life off the page into your mind, into your soul.
At the moment, you most precisely need it.
And this does not happen every day, but it happens, and when it does, it's unmistakable.
And so when we read our Bibles, it's not just, hey, I read First Kings 19, what was happening?
Oh, that must have been hard for Elijah.
Okay, I learned something about God, amen.
No, no, what if we read the Bible and then we just sat with what we read?
God, what verse or words stood out to me as I read that?
And what do you want me to do with that?
We read, we chew on, we meditate, we ask reflective questions.
This is called Lectio Divina, this ancient practice of divine reading.
Not just reading to understand, but reading to engage and experience a relationship with God.
And so we're gonna practice this.
And today I read Psalm 46.
And I don't know if you've been watching the news about what's happening in Venezuela and even just thinking about this last year or Russia and Ukraine and Gaza and Israel and the economy and all the things that are happening.
And you know, the world seems to have gone crazy.
And sometimes we don't know what to think or feel about that.
And so today I read in my morning time, Psalm 46 and then some of my newsfeed.
And it's amazing when you look at them side by side, and then you see in Psalm 46, God is an ever present strength in a time of trouble.
Even if the mountains fall into the heart of the sea and they roar and they churn, God is still able to make it into this quiet stream that flows right into his living room.
And though the nations are at war, and though there's conflict, and though we don't know what to do, he offers this simple sentence to his people, be still.
and know that I am God.
And that word be still means vacate.
Vacate and know that I am God.
Vacate what?
Vacate the position that you're in control, that what you want should happen, that you're God.
What's happening out there in the world?
Even in your own family, what's happening in your life?
You don't have control over, he does.
Our desire to control the outcome of everything all the time is one of our biggest problems.
And so God says, I want you to be still to vacate.
There is a God and you are not him.
And that's a very good thing.
It's a relief.
And so we're just going to meditate on this simple sentence, be still and know that we're going to practice.
And as we practice, I'm just gonna have you close your eyes.
I'm gonna read you some questions just to help stimulate some thought.
Be still and know that I am God.
Ask yourself, do I have a problem?
Maybe it's drinking.
Maybe it's eating too much, spending too much money.
looking at porn, binging on social media, sexual promiscuity, destructive relationships, maybe it's worrying or lying or judging or gossiping.
Is there any behavior in your life that betrays your values?
Pause.
That the answer for you is no, then you can thank God.
And you can use that strength in the spiritual muscle that you develop to help other people.
But for most of us, well, if we think a little deeper, in the quiet our mind wanders to what's important to us.
Maybe for you it's a divorce or a child who broke your heart.
or a boss you can't please, a disease you can't beat, a habit you cannot break, an anxiety you cannot overcome, a dream you cannot revive, a hatred that you cannot shake,
a relationship that you cannot fix, a situation that you cannot control.
Be still and know that I am God.
Invite Jesus into that space.
And maybe
Take the time to talk to him about this every day this week and watch what he will do.
Everyone look up here.
Take a deep breath.
This is what it means to reflect on scripture, to be still and know that he's God, to pause and let your mind at rest begin to think about what you're really thinking about.
You pray what you got, not what you think you should pray.
And so that thing, write it down.
Pray about that person, that situation, that brokenness in your own life and just say, every, every day God, I'm going to give this to you.
I don't know what to do with it, but I want to be still and I'm going to acknowledge that you're God and I'm not.
I remember one of those moments for me.
Those moments in my life where there was some things around my life that I could not control and I wanted so badly to fix.
that person or this situation and it just kept getting worse and it was affecting me and my wife and our family.
It was affecting so many things and I was just so aggravated.
Have you ever prayed when you're aggravated?
It's okay to pray when you're aggravated.
You don't have to pretend like you're not aggravated.
God knows you're aggravated.
And it was one night I was out in my backyard and I loved to take care of my lawn.
I want to make sure it's green and nice.
And I had just experienced chinch bugs where all these bugs had underneath the surface, eating all the grass and all these dead brown spots everywhere.
And I'm watering my lawn like eight o'clock at night and I'm aggravated.
I'm aggravated to the stupid bugs that ate my grass.
I'm aggravated to this person who did and said this, I'm aggravated to all these things.
And so I'm watering my lawn, aggravated.
And I just said, God, I'm aggravated.
I can't get rid of that feeling inside.
I wish you'd just fix it.
And as I'm holding onto that green hose at eight o'clock at night, getting bit up by mosquitoes in my backyard, God spoke a word to me.
Three simple words.
Doug,
I got this.
And I can't explain it exactly, but there's weight that I've been carrying for a really long time.
And I want to say that the problem didn't fix itself the next day or the next week or the next month, but God gave me the perspective and strength and wisdom to go through those months free and light because I prayed in my aggravation.
I listened and God spoke.
Doesn't do that every time in your life, in my life, but he does want to speak in those moments.
Now we're gonna practice one more, because maybe there's someone in your life that God wants you to speak a word of hope to, a word of encouragement to.
So I want you to close your eyes again and I'm gonna just read this scripture.
I want you to think of a person in your life who might need a word of encouragement from you.
Isaiah 50 verse four.
God wants us to listen so that we can hear a word and then share it with someone else.
And so just take a moment and think of a person in your life who might need hope or encouragement.
And maybe God
will give you a simple message for them, a simple verse for them, or a simple way to approach them.
Just take a moment and listen.
But if God brought a name into your mind, I want you to write it down.
If God gave you, maybe in a gentle whisper, something came to your mind about what you could say to them, I want you to write it down.
And this week, I want you to practice.
As we gather together on Tuesday to pray, we're gonna be practicing because maybe in the time of complete quiet, you've got nothing.
Maybe in the time of reading, that's all and be still.
You didn't get much and you're like, I don't really know.
And maybe you thought of a friend, but you have no idea what to say.
You're like, I'm not really good at this.
So listen.
Here's the last practice of pausing and praying, and that's this.
Keep showing up.
The way you learn to listen, the way you learn to speak, well, it's not gonna be perfect at first.
I mean, I'm gonna tell you one of the most embarrassing moments of my life was 10 minutes after I became a Christian.
And I was trying to figure out how to pray, and I'm an adult.
And here was my first prayer, ready?
Now I lay me down to sleep.
I pray the Lord my soul to keep.
If I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.
Amen.
I had no idea what to say to God.
I'd never really prayed other than a kid's prayer growing up.
Like the language of prayer was very difficult.
I remember the first time where, I mean literally at a pizza hut the next day,
And I'm gathering around and we're praying and I'm looking around and everyone watch us pray because for the first time I'm feeling self-conscious about praying out loud.
I wasn't even praying.
Someone else was praying.
I felt weird.
And I was like, man, I am not good at praying.
I don't know what to say.
And then I grew up in a church where they would pray out of the like the King James Version Bible.
They would pray like the and thou and thus.
And I'm like, man, I don't, first of all, I don't know how to pray and talk to God.
I don't know how to use those words.
And I just felt like I'm never going to learn how to pray.
My wife, she grew up in that same church where women never prayed out loud.
So she had a great prayer life in her own mind, but the first few times she spoke out loud, it felt very awkward.
My wife is a prayer warrior to this day, but the first few times she tried to pray out loud, it was like, it didn't feel right to her.
It felt awkward.
It felt not the right thing.
And you can feel a really self-conscious and you can sort of shut down and go like, those people, they know how to pray.
I'm never gonna learn how to pray.
All right, so for those of you who are like,
I'll leave this to the professional Christians to pray.
I'm just going to be quiet in my seat.
Listen, I want to free you of something.
And I want to free you by telling you this story.
There was this old redneck in this old church and he prayed out loud and he didn't use the right English and he didn't address God maybe in the right way.
And after his prayer, this woman walks up to him and she said, you know, you really didn't,
prayed to God in the right way and you didn't really use the proper English and this old man looked there and said, lady, I wasn't talking to you anyway.
So, so just, just for the record, as you practice prayer, you're not always going to say it right.
That's not the point.
Like listening to your kid babble for the first time, dad, dad, mom, mom, it's a precious thing to watch someone learn to develop the language of prayer.
I mean, I remember that one of the most precious prayers I ever heard was a little foster boy who was in our home for like six months.
And he didn't grow up knowing the Christian faith, knowing the Bible.
And I'd pray with him every night.
And one day after six months, I'm like, Hey, would you like to pray?
He's like, okay.
Here's how he opened his prayer to the God.
And theologically that's not correct.
But it was one of the most beautiful beginnings of a prayer I ever heard.
because he was forming his first ways to talk to a God he could not see, who was his father, whose eyes were on him.
Do not let someone despise your prayers.
You will grow in that grace like you learned to develop a language, right?
And listen, it's not always gonna be this amazing thing, just like any human relationship.
If you're in a relationship right now, husband, wife, boyfriend, girlfriend, is every conversation like, wow,
if it's a new relationship, maybe it is, but just trust me, it's not always gonna be that way.
There are moments of monotony, moments that we don't connect, moments where we have conflict, and God is a person, and sometimes we're not gonna have this beautiful, wow, connection.
But like Pastor Stefan said last week, when he asked his wife to marry him 40 years ago, he didn't just say, hey, I'm gonna marry you, and then I'm gonna tell you I love you at the very end.
No, they're gonna have conversations all the way along.
It's the same thing with God.
When you give your life to Jesus, when you give your life to God,
You say, God, come into my life, change me.
You don't just wait until heaven to say thank you.
You develop this conversation over time.
Christianity is a relationship with the living God.
And so we want to be people who practice.
Toes are what say this way, the key to prayer is simply praying.
And so the challenge for this week is what if you paused in your car early in the morning, late at night,
What if this wasn't the first thing you picked up or the last thing you looked at?
What if before you walked into a meeting or had a conversation, you paused?
You prayed, you invited God to give you words, or the right posture, the right tone.
What would happen in your life if you prioritized prayer?
And so this is our first week, next week, it's reflection, it's rejoicing.
And I want to close with this,
Final limitation.
I'm gonna ask you to close your eyes and ask yourself a question.
Here's the question.
Am I right with God?
Am I in a right relationship with the living God?
Who sees me?
Who knows everything about me?
Who knows what I'm thinking right now?
Am I right with him?
And if the answer is yes, praise God.
But if the answer is not, I don't want you to leave here in that position of, well, I haven't surrendered this part of my life or I haven't asked him forgiveness for this brokenness.
I haven't confessed this sin.
I haven't given him control of my life.
I haven't vacated.
And so at the close of every service, we give you this opportunity.
If you wanna start a relationship with the living God, listen, one of the most powerful prayers recorded in the Bible is a man who said seven words in the temple.
He couldn't even look up, he just beat his chest and he said, Lord, have mercy on me.
A sinner.
And those words give language to what all of us feel.
All of us need the mercy of God, all of us need forgiveness.
But we have to ask for it.
Say, well, God will forgive me eventually.
No, he's waiting for you to come and confess that you're a sinner that you need to save you.
It's the reason Jesus came.
It's the reason He died.
It's the reason He said on the cross, it's finished.
It's paid for, but you need to come.
You need to believe.
You need to make this decision for yourself.
Your mom can't make it.
Your dad can't make it.
I can't make it for you.
You're the only person who can make a decision to say, I want to follow Jesus.
I want to repent of my sins.
I want to give my life completely to God.
Jesus made that possible by His death, by His resurrection.
And today we're offering you this free gift, not one you can earn or reserve, only receive.
And so we're going to play a closing song.
And if you're like, I want to get right with God as 2026 begins this first weekend, I want to start this year off forgiven, free, filled with God's spirit.
If that's you and you know that's you, right now I'm going to ask you to stand up wherever you are and walk this way.
And we're going to pray a very simple prayer with you.
And as you come, we are going to rejoice with all
of heaven.
If that's you, right now, he's waiting for you.
Come this way.
You're so glad you're here right now.
I'm so honored to be a part of this moment where we lead you in a prayer.
Where your sins are forgiven.
Where God writes your name in his book of life.
Where you experience the peace and the sense of purpose that God created you for.
You were created to be in a relationship with God.
And so you're about to say the most powerful words that will ever come out of your mouth your entire life because the Bible says, buy your confession.
you'll be saved.
As you believe that God raised Jesus from the dead as you confess that He is Lord, you give your life to Him, you'll begin the most important relationship of your life.
And so I'm gonna lead you in a prayer in just a moment, but I just wanna pause for one more moment.
Cause I get a sense in the room, this size, there are people who are like, yeah, I need to do this, but you have doubts, you have fears,
the giving up of control of your life seems like a big step.
But I want you to know he's bigger than your doubts or your fears or your desire to control.
And your life is in much better hands in his hands than it is in your hands.
And so if there's anything in you that makes you right now want to stand up in front of all these people and walk this way, you know, this is the spirit of God saying, I love you.
I wanna draw you into my love.
And what we call 20 seconds of insane courage.
You can stand up and walk this way.
If there's anyone here, we're not gonna play another song, but you can join our sister as she comes.
We'd love to see you here.
Come on.
Welcome.
I'm glad you're here.
Come on up.
I'm really glad you're here.
That's a good friend right there.
Come on, church.
Let's keep praying right now as people make these decisions.
This is life or death.
These decisions change eternity.
So now for you that have come, it's a chance for you to say out loud to God, but he's been waiting for you to say for so long.
And so I'm just gonna give you some simple words to say to God.
It's not about the perfect words.
It's about a heart and mind that's ready.
And now God's attention is on God's listening to you.
So I want you to say this out loud to him.
Repeat these words out loud after me.
Say this, Lord God.
I open my heart.
and I invite you inside.
Forgive my sin.
Today I repent.
Now fill me with your spirit and I will walk with you all the days of my life.
I pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Amen guys, congratulations.
Welcome to the family of God.
So before you go back to your seats, you just made the most important decision you could ever make in your life.
that you would just give us five minutes.
I would love to meet you personally.
We'd love to give you a gift, a Bible.
You'll be back with your friends in just a moment.
So I'm gonna ask you to follow me and the group over to the open door.
You'll be back with your friends in a moment.
Let's give them a applause.
Did they go this way guys?
And church, let's be the people who practice the presence of God.
Let's close in this final song of worship as we make room for Jesus.
that'll be up here to pray with you.
If not, we will see you Tuesday night for our night of prayer.
Thanks for listening to today's message.
You know, here at Calvary, we believe a relationship with Jesus changes everything.
And if you've decided to follow Jesus, we'd love for you to text the word believe to 31352.
So you can find out what it means to follow Christ.
And to learn more about Calvary and all of our campuses, you're free to visit Calvary FTL.
Thank you very much.